NXDOC-2332 RTE Customization (#1836)
nuxeo/doc.nuxeo.com-content: src/nxdoc/web-ui/web-ui-tutorials/how-to-use-rich-text-editor-rte-for-article-publishing.md

In such situations, you can use Nuxeo to centralize all your content in a single place. Make use of the content services like renditions to retrieve your content in various formats and sizes, or workflows to manage your content publishing process. Nuxeo will not replace your existing CMS. Rather, it integrates with it to make your content CMS agnostic and will be used by your content authors to write articles in Web UI using the rich text editor it provides.

In this page we will give you an overview of how you can use the rich text editor and configure it to your liking. You will also find some ideas to configure or extend it further.

{{#> callout type='info'}}
This how-to requires Nuxeo LTS 2021 or newer.
{{/callout}}

## Using the Rich Text Editor

To test the default behavior of the rich text editor

1. In a Workspace or a Folder, create one or several `Picture` documents.
1. In a Workspace or a Folder, create a new `Note` document and keep the `HTML` format.
1. Type your content and save it directly while being in the document view. Use the rich text editor toolbar to leverage the various options.

To reference one or several pictures stored in Nuxeo

> 1. Click on the `insert images from existing documents` [//TODO insert icon] toolbar icon

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click on the `insert images from existing documents` [//TODO insert icon] toolbar icon.
```

Author: Change incorporated.

As usual with Nuxeo, anything in the UI can be accessed through an external system by using the REST API. //TODO link to the REST API doc

When retrieving a Note document, the content will be referenced in the corresponding document property, e.g.:

```
[...]
"properties": {
  "note:note": "Some text and now an image <img src=\&quot;https://nuxeo-server-url.nuxeo.com/nuxeo/nxfile/default/793dc397-2ecc-46ee-8840-92d1d88faed6/file:content/Away.jpg\&quot;>"
[...]
```

Any image you referenced is stored in a way that lets you parse the content and adapt it to your needs. Your own tool can easily adapt that URL to call further Nuxeo services, for example to request a particular rendition.

## Configuring the Query

By default, inserting images in the rich text editor will reference the current content stored in any document having the `Picture` facet.

Depending on your needs, you may want to change the query to retrieve specific document types, documents in a specific state (e.g. only return approved images). You may even want users to pick only the latest version available for greater control.

Here's a quick example to retrieve only the latest version of an image.

> //TODO check with UI team what we should provide by default in the template: e.g. results layout for people to have the custom code or not to avoid them having to maintain it?

Reviewer: If we're going with the External Template approach, the closest we can get to the default config the better (for maintainability purposes). It's also a very simple approach, meaning that it should be very easy for anyone to work on top of it.

Author: Understood :+1: 
I'll need your help to make it happen by providing the default config to put in Studio; we can see that together afterwards.

Author: Created https://jira.nuxeo.com/browse/NXS-6479 for the template

1. In Studio Modeler, go to **External Templates**; import the **Rich Text Editor Default Configuration** template.
1. Go to **Configuration** > **Page Providers**; select the `document_picker` page provider.
1. Replace the query filter with the following:

```

> ecm:mixinType != 'HiddenInNavigation' AND ecm:mixinType = 'Picture' AND ecm:isTrashed = 0 AND ecm:isVersion = 1 AND ecm:isLatestVersion = 1

Reviewer: FYI, this removes the `file:content IS NOT NULL` query part, which would prevent you from getting `Picture` documents without images.

Author: Ah, I'll add it back, thanks Miguel!

Author: Change incorporated.

    name: rte-image-referencing-search.png
    1.1.3#screenshot#up_to_date
--}}
![rte-image-referencing-search.png](nx_asset://10e93a3b-87e2-400b-8a9b-7b3ac85697a7 ?border=true)

The search form, the query used to filter pictures and the results presentation are all configurable using Nuxeo Studio.

## Accessing the Content of the Rich Text Editor

As usual with Nuxeo, anything in the UI can be accessed through an external system by using the [REST API]({{page page='rest-api'}}).

When retrieving a Note document, the content will be referenced in the corresponding document property, e.g.:

```
[...]
"properties": {
  "note:note": "Some text and now an image <img src=\&quot;https://nuxeo-server-url.nuxeo.com/nuxeo/nxfile/default/793dc397-2ecc-46ee-8840-92d1d88faed6/file:content/Beach.jpg\&quot;>"
[...]
```

Any image you referenced is stored in a way that lets you parse the content and adapt it to your needs. Your own tool can easily adapt that URL to call further Nuxeo services, for example to request a particular rendition.

## Configuring the Query

> By default, inserting images in the rich text editor will reference the current content stored in any document having the `Picture` facet.
> 
> Depending on your needs, you may want to change the query to retrieve specific document types, documents in a specific state (e.g. only return approved images). You may even want users to pick only the latest version available for greater control.

Reviewer 2: I think we should explain at this point that this relies on a page provider, so the reader doesn't have to wait until the instructions to figure it out. Suggestion:
```suggestion
By default, inserting images in the rich text editor will reference the current content stored in any document having the `Picture` facet. This is achieved by calling the `document_picker` page provider, which you may want to change to retrieve specific document types, documents in a specific state (e.g. only return approved images). You may even want users to pick only the latest version available for greater control.
```

### Using Multiple Rich Text Editors

Let's assume you want to add a field to put a summary of your article. Or that you want to separate the introduction, the main content of the article and the conclusion to adapt your content more easily to a wider variety of website layouts.

In this kind of situation, it is possible to use multiple rich text editors and to map them to different properties of your documents. Here's a summary of how you could proceed.

1. Create a custom document type.
1. Add a custom schema to it, and add your new fields using the `String` type.
1. In Nuxeo Studio Designer, configure the edit layout for your document type.
1. Drag and drop a `nuxeo-html-editor` element and bind it to the corresponding field. Repeat that operation for every additional field you created.

### Tracking Relations Between Documents

When referencing pictures in the rich text editor, Nuxeo won't keep track of which images were used for which article. To make overall maintenance and tracking easier, you may want to implement a relation system.

Here's a summary of how you could proceed. Note that implementing this feature requires coding knowledge.

> 1. Add an event handler that will be triggered on the following events for your custom document type: `About to create`, `Before document modification`.

Reviewer 2: Are there any documentation for these events that we could link here?

Author: Added links
